Requiring down for four, three, two, one.
There are always steps to be taken one right after another, and what you do is you calmly
and rationally, sometimes as quickly as possible, go through those steps.
We were, of course, in serious danger of losing all of our oxygen, which meant all of our
electrical power and our propulsion system would die also.
The real story of Apollo 13.
This is a very exciting summer in space.
Hi, I'm Jeff Fox.
In this time on Inside Space, I'm at the Space Center in Houston, Texas.
Now think about this.
Norm Faggard has been up in the mirror set a US record for time spent.
He will be retrieved by the shuttle, which this time actually will be acting like a shuttle.
And this summer, Ron Howard's brand new film Apollo 13.
In fact, that's why we're in Houston.
This is the weekend of the big press showing.
And right here at the Space Center, just a whole exhibit of the things that went into the
movie.
But as long as we're going to meet the director and the stars, you might as well too.
Apollo 13 flight controllers.
Give me a go-no, go-for-lunch.
Booster.
Go.
Retro.
Go, vital.
We're going fly.
Guidance.
Guidance, go.
Surgeon.
Go-for-line.
E-com.
We're going to fly.
G-N-C.
We're going to tell you.
The hour's Apollo 13 might be the most historically accurate entertainment Hollywood has ever produced.
Twenty-five years ago, the mass media had begun to present a work-a-day attitude about space.
But according to the men and women who actually lived them, manned space launches were anything
but predictable.
It's nothing routine about flying to the moon.
I can buy it for that.
There were giants on and off the earth in those days.
They had an M-A-S-N-S-M-A-L-L-R-D-E-O-D-A-L-R-R-T-B.
Apollo 13 is based on an autobiographical account by Jim Lovell.
Naval Aviator, astronaut on Gemini 7 and Commander of Gemini 12, he'd come tantalizingly
close to the moon on Apollo 8.
But when an ear infection bumped the Al Shepherd's crew from the third lunar mission, Lovell
thought he had his shot.
You know that Easter vacation trip we had planned for Uncle Polkko?
Uh-oh.
I was thinking there might be a slight change in destination.
Maybe say the moon.
Jim is a very competitive and driven and yet the same time completely pleasant and
unobtrusive kind of guy.
He does have everything very well organized.
If you're going to be taking a trip with Jim, he'll do everything.
He'll drive.
He'll tell you when you're going to eat.
He'll plot out the gas.
He'll suggest when you can get a, you can take 20 minutes nap now.
He's that organized.
It's hard for me to recognize those qualities.
I try to do everything logically and to make sure that we cover all of our bases.
And that's perhaps what Tom was talking about.
Houston, we have a main trust A-underbolt now too.
It's reading 25 and a half.
Main bus B is reading SIP right now.
No packs in place Fred Hayes, a Mississippi-born engineer who had served in the Navy, Marines,
and Air Force.
Tell me a little bit about Fred Hayes.
I found him to be very roofful, a good sense of humor.
And I tried to bring some of that to him.
He's a rocket scientist.
I mean, these guys are aerospace engineers or build mechanics.
He still had kind of a country boy sense about him.
He was in a flying business.
Yeah, he's in a flying business.
The only military choice I had that would lead to a commission as an officer was the
Naval Aviation cadet problem.
I had never been in an airplane in my life.
Had no desire to fly, but it was a way to become an officer.
What was that gauge reading before you hit the switch?
You don't tell me how to fly the damn CM, right?
You don't need to do it.
You do a job.
Ask me to stir the damn tax and I stir the tank.
I just asked you what the gauge was reading.
Kevin Bacon had an additional acting challenge.
His portrayal of Jack Swaggerd, an Air Force fighter jock, also making his first trip into
space had to be based on other people's memories.
The citizens of Colorado had elected Swaggerd to Congress in 1982, but he died of cancer
before he could serve.
Jack was just a new guy on that crew and I think he adapted very well and he did everything
that was after him.
I think that entire crew were absolutely superb to work with.
Gene Krants was one of four flight directors on 13.
He was sitting console during most of the critical mission phases.
Gene is today as he was then exactly the sort of guy you'd want doing that job.
Discipline, concerned with morale, he's tough, he's competent.
The very definition of a mission controller.
Krants is played by Ed Harris.
He knew what he was doing, that's for sure.
He was responsible for it all.
One said, Rocket leaves the launch pad, you know, it's his baby, he's calling the shots.
The flight director's got the responsibility during the course of the mission for every
action associated with mission success and crew safety.
This mission Apollo 13 very rapidly moved from the mission's success get to the moon and
land on it down to a survival type situation.
It's April 1970.
America is fighting an undeclared war in Southeast Asia.
In struggling with a cultural revolution back home.
Nixon rules the White House, but rock rules the airwaves.
And out of Cape Kennedy's launch complex 39, Apollo 13 NASA's first real lunar science
mission is making ready for lift off.
More Americans have walked on the moon and returned to walk among us.
Some Americans are questioning the value of sending others.
Many Americans are simply preoccupied, caught up in sweeping societal changes.
As patriotism and uniformity fall out of alignment.
Most Americans become comfortable with the space age.
They've forgotten the danger.
Forgotten the three years earlier, three American astronauts lost their lives, nowhere near
space.
Here are three guys who are always looking at death and in a job that even when you're
just practicing, you can die.
That's the stakes.
The Apollo one really showed you what could go wrong and how dangerous this whole situation.
It showed that machines will break down.
This is what these guys were trusting.
Not only the entire prestige of their undertaking, but their lives too as well.
The fact that an engineered machine will work well enough to take them to the moon and bring
them back home.
We all know that we all have toaster weapons that don't always work the way they're supposed
to.
And one of the first things you think about when you see the Apollo capsule, especially
when you stand next to it, is it's tiny, at least relatively tiny, compared this to
the space shuttle.
This could probably fit in the space shuttle.
And you had three guys sitting chic to jowl.
Some believe them.
Now when we come back, we'll meet some of the people who live through Apollo 13.
So don't go away.
And we're back on inside space from the space shuttle.
And we're back on inside space from the space center in Houston, sort of ironic that
this command module, or the command module for Apollo 13 actually, was called the Odyssey
because the trip turned out to be quite an Odyssey.
In fact, Tom Hanks said it says, great as saga as anything the Greeks ever put to paper.
One of the seven greatest stories in literature.
How do you get back home?
I had been to see a launch.
I found it to be this sort of immensely powerful experience.
Well, launch sequence got named when we were in the full suits, which are not airtight,
but you do have to have air pumped into it to an order to breathe.
We're yanked back into those seats flat on our backs.
And when they started shaking that thing, you know, and we're shouting out our lines,
and there's a lot of noise going on.
I tell you, I felt like we were riding it.
The Saturn 5 is the most powerful launcher of its time, able to throw 200,000 pounds into
orbit, it stands 363 feet tall, and weighs almost 6.5 million pounds.
Its first three stages will walk to Apollo 13 into a 118 mile high parking orbit.
The fourth stage will send them tracking for the moon.
Several hundred miles downrange, second stage engine number five cuts off two minutes early.
This is the worst they'll have to deal with on per turn.
It's like we just had our clutch for this mission.
Well, anything that you lose an engine in a launch phase, it's a pucker time.
And I had, frankly, had forgotten that it cut off as early as it did.
And those other four engines just continued to burn, had to burn a little bit longer, and
used up all the same amount of fuel.
So it ended up not being a big problem.
And we kind of took things one thing at a time.
We had the problem.
We knew we'd get off that stage, we'd be okay.
And we didn't carry it over in any way that it was going to be a precursor of anything
that was going to happen.
But we were ready to respond to anything that happened during the rest of the flight as
we had to later on.
For 56 hours, Apollo 13 smoothly obeys Sir Isaac Newton's laws.
Lovell Hayes and Swiggard perform a customary live TV broadcast.
But up against Dick Cavett laughing in the movie of the week, the Apollo 13 show is seen
only in mission control.
Okay, good evening, America.
And welcome aboard Apollo 13.
Hello, hello.
This is the crew of Apollo 13, which everybody there, nice evening.
With the TV show over, Houston has just a few housekeeping tours for the crew before
they're due to enter a sleep period.
One item is to stir the cryogenic tanks containing super cold oxygen.
Not quite a liquid and not quite a gas.
The oxygen will stratify and fail to flow correctly unless it's stirred by a small fan located
inside the tanks.
As command module pilot, it swigards job.
We've got one more item for you when you get a chance.
We like it to stir up your cryo tanks.
Roger that.
Roger, man, be on the boat.
The explosion that took but a second was actually two years in the making.
A faulty temperature controlled switch that somehow made it past all the checkpoints from
manufacturer to launch.
The levels crew didn't know it.
One oxygen tank had overheated, a couple of stirring fan rotations and the pressure was
just too much.
But at the time of the explosion and the spacecraft, several controllers had single events that
occurred.
The instrumentation communications guy called up and said he flight, we switched from narrow
beam to wide beam.
We had a main bus undervolt.
So there were indications of something showing up in many of the controller's console.
And very shortly thereafter, you heard a crew come down and say, hey Houston, we've
got a problem.
But it really took us a while to decide what the problem was or how bad it was.
We had been trained not to jump too quickly, not to do things too quickly until we were
sure of what we were doing.
And the problem that people were having in the control center is there was such a massive
set of indications of a problem of a very large dimension that people were not sure
that they could believe what they were seeing on their gauges.
One at a time, one at a time, one at a time, E-commerce is an instrumentation problem or
we're looking at real power loss here.
It's reading a quadruple failure that can't happen.
It's got to be instrumentation.
They were searching for some common explanation which would help explain all of these crazy
readings and one of those common explanations could be something wrong with the instrumentation
system, some kind of electrical problem.
And it's the most frustrating kind of problem that you can have as a flight controller is
to know that the things are happening and you don't know exactly what they are.
We're in a pretty large bank associated with the carcassia warning.
Level kept saying it was kind of a fine spray, almost like a mist.
I'm looking out the ads that we are, if that's something.
But then it crystallized and stayed with them and then of course there were particles,
mylar particles and pieces of metal from the explosion.
We are, we are, we are, something out after the space.
Right here we got your venting.
Okay, can you tell us anything about the venting?
Okay.
What's coming from, what window you see it at?
Coming out of window one, right now, Jack.
I couldn't tell you today why I looked out the window but then that's when I saw the
gassy escaping and that told me that we were of course in serious danger of losing all
of our oxygen which meant all of our electrical power and our propulsion system would die
also.
Then when Jim Lovel came down and said hey we're venting something, then it was sort of
like you had just got rabbit punch hit right in the back of the head and all of a sudden
that says not only is this a problem, this is a survival situation we're moving into.
So let's start thinking down that track right now.
We were worried about water, we were worried about power, we were worried about oxygen
and debris, we were worried about all the consumables as we called them.
And my concern was increasing all the time.
It went from, I wonder what this is going to do to the landing to, I wonder if we can
get back home again.
We now have shown altitude of 180,521 nautical miles in Mission Concord.
We're looking, now looking towards an alternate mission swinging around the moon and using
the lunar module power systems because of the situation that has developed here this evening.
This is Apollo control Houston.
With limited oxygen there's not only a problem with life support, there's also no way
to make enough electrical power or enough water.
In mission control, crans decides the lunar module must become the lifeboat home.
Same to queries, the lunar module was designed to support two people for up to 45 hours.
Now it must sustain three for almost double that time.
For the crew of Apollo 13, the moon is lost.
I'll say the immediate thing I had, a motion was just frustration and a sickness to my stomach
and with disappointment because the mission was aborted.
We had a cascading set of things that had to work right for our survival.
The first was that the limb had not been damaged by the explosion.
The second thing was to use the limb engine to get pointed back in the right direction.
We were headed in the direction that would still have us an orbit today.
Once we thought it was survival that we were going to have some difficulties getting
the crew back home, each one of the controllers thought, what do I got, what do I got to save
in order to get there?
How can I cut a corner to provide a little bit more electrical power?
So this control team very smoothly moved into.
Let's figure out how we're going to get this guy home.
Turn off the radars, cabin heater, instrument displays, a guidance computer, the whole
SMET.
Whoa, guidance computer, what do they need to do another burn?
Jean, they won't even know where it's where they're pointed.
The more time we talk down here, the more juice they waste up there.
I've been looking at the data for the past hour.
That's the deal.
Okay, John.
And then we finish the burn.
We'll power down the line.
All right.
What kind of guy were you?
Well, I think I was probably one of the most emotional of the flight directors.
I generally would let my feelings be expressed very clearly.
And I think everybody that knew me was able to read me pretty well.
And I spent a lot of time with them.
I could read them pretty well.
Find out how to squeeze every amp out of both of these guys' machines.
I want this mark all the way back to Earth with time to spare.
We never lost an American in space where Sherrish Hill not going to lose one on my watch.
You're quoted in the movie as saying that nothing like this would happen on your watch.
That's exactly right.
They, you have to take and put all of the mission experiences together.
Many of these folks started off in Mercury.
There was no piece of cake.
We had a bunch of problems there, but we pulled it out.
Came along Gemini.
Gemini, we had the confidence to use the space systems we were given.
Apollo, we had problems in the early days, but we learned the Sabhama.
We got confidence in the spacecraft.
We got confidence in the crew.
We had confidence in the training process.
We had confidence in ourselves.
And that's what it took to get this crew home.
Marvel, Hayes, and Swigart fight sickness and CO2.
As Inside Space continues with the real story of Apollo 13, stay with us.
And here's what the papers of the day said about Apollo 13.
I think NASA put a pretty good spin on it the first day.
As controllers deal with the cascade of problems, Word begins to spread about the troubled mission.
I know you've deceived me, now here's the scene.
For the crewmen of the Apollo 13, we'll hold silence for a moment, please.
This was sort of hidden from us back then.
Then if you look at the old headline from the Houston Chronicle, from the first day,
it says, chances of return, excellent.
Have we made a mistake by sort of holding this from the public how much danger that these
three guys were in?
I don't think they wanted to create a sense of panic.
I think that in a lot of ways, they're fairly lost about it.
But the fact of the matter is by the time they did come back, it was pretty well known
what was going on.
I think the entire world really rallied around their safer turn.
At the moment, the astronauts are continuing to try to isolate their trouble.
The late report says the spacecraft now is operating on battery power alone.
All unnecessary equipment is being turned off.
It seems that the entire world is caught up in Apollo 13's flight.
But in the flight control center, the size of Jean Krantz universe has shrunk to just
the spacecraft, the astronauts, and the ground support staff.
An important point to remember at this time, too, is the fact that we had gotten off what
we call the free return to Jeffrey.
We had done our mid-coarse maneuver some time before.
And this meant that we were no longer on a path that would allow us to be swung around
the moon and come back towards the landing spot on the earth.
We had gotten off this trajectory because we wanted to go to our landing site.
April 14, 243 AM.
Lovell commands the lunar module Aquarius to fire its descent engine, the one they would
have used to land on the moon.
This burn will slingshot Odyssey and Aquarius around the far side of the moon and back
on a course toward earth.
But not before consumables will run out.
Apollo 13 needs a fast track home.
Our second milestone was what was known as the Paris Cynthia Plus 2 burn.
Because consumables were critical, we had decided to burn at about two hours past the
moon.
About 39 hours.
I've been over it to shorten the time to get home again.
The burn looked very good.
In fact, it was an excellent burn.
Our peak current during the burn was around 50 amps.
Immediately thereafter, we gave the crew their initial power down information to bring the
majority of the spacecraft systems down with exception of the communication system.
Twelve hours are so part of the burn.
Craft was mumbling about getting power down.
He wanted to get power down right now.
Deep slate was sitting over there and he just wanted to get the crew to sleep.
We were keeping them up too long and all this kind of stuff.
We finished that burn and all of a sudden three people.
Craft comes down here, slate comes over and in through the door walks Max Fijet.
They all want exactly the opposite things.
Fijet wants to get into the spacecraft.
He's worried about spacecraft thermal control.
Slate wants crew put, sleep.
Craft wants power down.
And all were incompatible.
And then, once later, the crew powers down the limb.
They'll need to save all remaining battery for reentry into Earth's atmosphere.
By 2.30 a.m. on the 15th, just eight hours later, the temperature and aquarius is ranging
from 85 degrees in the sunlight to 22 degrees in the shadows.
I went in there one time to go to sleep and Jack was on top of the couch and said, Jack
put up all the window shades.
Let's get the place nice and dark.
We'll just relax and have it.
Nice and dark in here.
We can really get some sleep.
I woke up a couple hours later and I was freezing.
Eventually, the entire spacecraft got down to about 35 degrees Fahrenheit, which is about
the temperature of a refrigerator.
I recall that we went in there to get some hot dogs one day and it was like reaching
into the freezer for the food.
And Fred and I broke out our lunar boots, which we had stood away in the lunar module
and Jack looked at us wet feet a couple times.
And he had a next set of underwear so he put that on.
The next most critical thing to me was that the vehicle stayed functional as we cooled
them off.
We chilled them down in ourselves for that matter, down to a below 40 degrees in some areas
of the vehicles that actually froze.
It was always to be forming everywhere.
Frost was forming on the windows.
It was getting cold.
We knew they were desperately cold.
We knew they were desperately tired.
But again, we had our job to do.
They had their job to do.
There's little to do now, but wait.
Shiver against the cold and try to rest.
Lovell, Hayes and Swigart have to limit themselves to six ounces of drinking water each per day.
This will not only conserve water, but reduce the accumulation of urine in the capsule.
The only mistake we probably made throughout the whole flight that caused any concern and
it wasn't real serious is that we asked them to remember.
We asked them to stow all the waste.
We told them to quit using the urine dump.
So they started stowing it in bags.
We thought we were told anyway that don't put any waste water dumps over the side because
it might disturb the trajectory.
And we're tracking you and we want to make sure that you can come back and hit the proper
angle to reenter.
We didn't mean for them to do that the whole mission.
We forgot to tell them to go ahead and start dumps.
We were dumping that stuff so by the time they got to the end of the flight, they had
bags of urine stored all over that place.
The long journey home is taking its toll on the astronauts.
Fred Hays is rapidly showing signs of a deep systemic infection.
Yeah, what I developed was a lower prostrate infection, which you can get here.
I mean, it has nothing to do with space.
And that was due, I assume, to the colonists, dehydration.
So he had what they call a motorman's friend.
It's basically like a catheter you wear with a bag and you urinate into that.
He digressed into a fever and the shakes and by the end of the flight, he was in really
pretty better shape.
On board, the crew think they can breathe a little easier.
They can see the way out of this now.
But the mission management team is tuning into a new threat.
The decision for life support isn't really the problem.
Carbon dioxide buildup is.
There was a felonin mad smiley and he's in the movie who quite early on recognized we're
going to have a CO2 problem before too much longer.
Both lunar module and mothership are equipped with canisters of lithium hydroxide to scrub
the astronauts exhaled carbon dioxide out of the air.
But because Odyssey and Aquarius are built by two different companies, the canisters
from one won't fit the other.
We got to find a way to make this fit into the hole for this.
Use nothing but that.
Let's get it organized.
Okay, let's build a filter.
We had this situation where you have a square cylinder and a round hole because of the
differences in the two spacecraft.
And these guys went off and figured out a way to get this thing done and tape it up with
using checklist covers and plastic bags and in hose suit hoses.
And the ground red is up for procedure in order to adapt some of the command module lithium
hydroxide canisters for use in the limb.
We read that thing we didn't have in those days today.
We probably shoot that up with on a teleprinter and have the whole procedure.
We had to read this very detailed procedure.
Take a three foot piece of tape.
Do this.
Do that.
They show in the movie and I guess level says in the book that they actually when they finally
did it, they came and they ran right up to this desk where we're sitting here.
He puts it on your desk and it's this contraption with masking tape.
All by paper and masking tape and everything else.
That is correct.
Jim and I constructed one of these things.
At this point in time I think the partial pressure of carbon dioxide was reading about 15
millimeters.
And we constructed two of these things and put them on line and I think within an hour
the partial pressure of CO2 was down to two tenths.
I think the thing that really was neat is that when we got the picture back from the
lunar module, you got the picture back of what they had done, it looked exactly like they
had the one we had built on the ground.
The engineering team that we have supporting the flight operations that's called spacecraft
analysis would always come up with some gimmicky kind of thing to figure out some way to work
around the problems we were having on board the spacecraft.
It eventually turned into a discipline we called the Inflite Maintenance.
With no computers online, the crew of Apollo 13 must perform a never before tried manual
maneuver.
An inside space returns.
This is the size of the lifeboat, the lunar module that saved the astronauts and take
my work for it.
Television makes things look bigger than they really are.
Three guys in here, it's just the shame that this piece of equipment that saved the astronauts
couldn't be brought back with the astronauts.
A few seats away from the flight director sits the person in charge of trajectory and
he wasn't a happy fellow.
Apollo 13 is starting to veer markedly and mysteriously off track.
No one remembers that Aquarius is built to vent tiny amounts of steam into space.
Lunar modules are designed for short jaunts to the moon.
A few puffs of gas wouldn't amount to much, but over a 200,000 mile voyage in zero gravity,
a tiny repeated velocity vector can mean the difference between making it home and becoming
a permanent monument to human confusion.
In about 105 hours, the ground after some tracking realized that we were not on a trajectory
that would get us safely back home and that we'd have to make another maneuver.
To conserve power, the crew cannot risk activating the LEMS navigational platform.
Electrical energy must be saved to power up the command module before reentry.
This last maneuver was going to be unique because we did not have the platform powered
up, so we didn't have a normal method of determining the attitude of the spacecraft in order
to perform the burn.
Because it was a manual burn, we had a three-man operation.
Jack would take care of the time.
He'd tell us when the light off, the engine went to stop it.
Fred handled pitch maneuver.
I handled the roll maneuver and I pushed the buttons to stop the engine.
So hey, we ought to recommend a three-man LEM after this, I don't know.
The control system was designed only to fly the lunar module and with that big mass was
on there, the center of gravity moved way out and movements with our thrusters would
not give us the same results.
And we had to learn by if one movement of the thruster, what that would do to the actual
change in the attitude of the spacecraft.
You begin as a layman, you begin to realize just how challenging a lot of those procedures
were for the manual burn.
This is not like I just had to keep the car on the straightaway and make sure we didn't
go over 25 miles an hour.
I mean, this was something that had really never been tried and it was a life for death
maneuver.
The die is cast.
There's nothing to do but wait.
70 hours will elapse before the vacuum of space will be chased away by the home world's
atmosphere.
Fred Hays is cold, ill, weak and uncomfortable.
Level and swaggered begin to worry just how this will turn out.
You know, Fred Hays said something when we met him, he said, well, when there wasn't
anything to do and there were hours and hours where there was nothing for them to do,
he said that then it then it got, that was bad, he said.
And they hear that coming from the guy, you know, that really speaks volumes.
The car is not a bad thing.
It's the human body's way of bringing all systems online to deal with a dicey situation.
Was the crew of 13 ever scared?
When you say scared, I think we were concerned.
The thing that you have to realize is that it was not one of these out of control.
Your car's getting toward the wall or off the road.
You know, as time went on, we got more and more confidence in the fact that we get home.
Did they ever think they'd run out of options?
We never gave that a thought.
As long as we had something to do, we just kept doing it.
I think they have to, to a certain extent, try their best to put the fear of death out
of their minds.
We kept trying to say, you know, were you scared?
Were you scared?
What was like being scared, you know, and they kept saying again and again and again.
We just wanted to work our way through the problem and, you know, run through the systems
and, you know, we had a tremendous amount of help on the ground and we were trying to
figure out what to do, you know, minute to minute.
That's really the way they have to think.
That's the only way to deal with it.
All three of us do enough about the command module to know that this was not supposed to
happen and that we were actually in very, very serious trouble.
And I had two very competent people on board.
Is he a right stuff kind of guy?
I think they're the right stuff is just, they have become this kind of, I'm not too
dimensional version of it, but kind of a quick identification kit for your average ass
or not.
I found them all to be in Jim particular, to be first off an engineer, a guy who understands
the systems and knows that there are always steps to be taken one right after another.
And what you do is you calmly and rationally, sometimes as quickly as possible, go through
those steps.
That's what Jim did on the flight.
But even he himself, he told me and he intimates it in the book that there were sometimes
there where the eyes rolled the back of his head and they honestly wondered how in the world
did this happen to me.
We are about 70 hours from home and we think we have the situation in control.
We've projected the consumables as I've described and we have a plan for carrying out the rest
of the mission, but there is going to be no relaxation at all.
We've tried to simulate virtually everything that we've had the crew to do that is non-normal
that they've done.
And we've proven most of everything that we've been able to run on the simulator prior
to passing it up to another maybe some details of it and that.
But at least we've checked the feasibility of everything we've done and we're continuing
to do that.
In Houston, Ken Manningley, John Aaron and a team of engineers are inventing a way to
power up the command module on the little electricity they have left.
He came Manningley and flies the command module simulator for hours, improvising a score
of switch throws for levels crew to play.
But there could be no second take of this symphony.
They'd have to get it right on the first read.
And our main game plan was to keep on the plan and not make any mistakes and the squeeze
to consumables.
Gene's team, Gene had been off-console when he left at the time of the accident and his
whole focus had been on what are we going to do to power up the command module, how are
we going to make it safe, how are we going to configure it for our best odds for entry.
Throughout the night and throughout the days, it's prior to this saying that ground
of course was working fiviously with crews and the simulators and with the engineers looking
at the systems to read up to us a set of procedures which we would be able to follow to make
a successful entry.
As they were waiting for this final checklist to come forward, it was sort of a race against
time.
Make sure it was perfect down on the ground so we wanted to keep time available to us to
get this checklist right.
They wanted to have some time to think this thing over.
So it was really a question of making the call when it was time to go forward in this.
And they were getting sort of, let's get that thing up here guys.
What are you doing down there?
If you had to remember that when we're back on the free return course, the flight was
going to terminate abruptly when we started to hit the atmosphere and if we weren't prepared
for it.
You know, there was no go-around second chance so I was getting concerned that we wouldn't
get the procedures up.
By the time we got to the point where we knew we had enough consumables to make it and
we had a procedure to get powered up and assuming the command module was going to come up
okay, which again we couldn't do anything about that.
It was either going to work or it wasn't.
There were no alternatives if it didn't we were done.
They did.
They read us up procedures.
Fred, Jack and I practice these procedures by reading them and then completed them.
I think it's amazing the way that people can respond so fast to get this job done.
Odyssey is alive and online again.
The crew prepares to jettison the service module.
For the first time they'll see the extent of the damage.
It was to me sort of an amazing sight.
I didn't realize that this whole panel by the high gain antenna was blown clean off,
but along the area where the panel normally swings open.
The moment has come to cast off Aquarius, she was built for space and to space she must
be released.
The voyage is almost over.
Ironically, the very atmosphere which promises air and life also represents a barrier to
cross.
Basically, it comes down to this question.
Has Odyssey's heat shield been damaged by the explosion?
Will it withstand the plunge through the Earth's atmosphere?
By this point in the space age, most people know that communications with capsules are
impossible during the last fiery plunge, but it usually only takes three minutes.
So we sat there for a while, continuing the hard-to-deaf patient waiting.
The blackout period was extended and for some reason that we don't know why today,
instead of being in blackout for about three minutes we were in this blackout communications
phase for about four minutes.
The very technologies which allow Earth to talk to space cloud, now flash television
pictures around the world as Apollo 13 splashes into the Pacific Ocean.
For level haze and swagger, the Odyssey is over.
I think I can quickly say that, never every four in the history of man, that more people
watch together, pray together, and rejoice together at your safe return that on this occasion.
Safely aboard the USS Iwo Jima, Apollo 13's gym level sends a message on behalf of his crew
to the men and women who safely guided them home.
It reads,
Words cannot express the praise we have for all the personnel of the mission control
whose dedicated efforts provided a successful conclusion to Apollo 13.
Our deepest and heartfelt thanks, sign gym level, jack swagger and Fred haze.
Putting Apollo 13 in perspective, when we come back with more inside space in just a minute,
don't go away.
And we're back on inside space looking at Apollo 13 from the space center here in Houston.
Now here's a movie that we all know the ending of.
I mean the guys come back safe and sound and yet it's very exciting with all sorts of
revelations and lots and lots of plot twists.
And yet it's a movie with no guns, no gore, no violence and yet very compelling which
is what I asked director Ron Howard about.
Here you have this incredible action movie, no guns, no gore, no violence and very limited
sex.
No villains.
It's a great story.
It's a great story and it's not really about bad guys and conflict and it's, you know,
there's the greatest conflict.
Are they going to make it?
And more importantly, how in the world that they pull it off?
They're trained to solve problems and you know, you listen to the tapes of any pilot who's
going down and you don't hear screaming and carrying on and panic very often.
Usually you hear them working the problem, particularly the military pilots that highly
train pilots until the very last instant.
So a few guys were given the opportunity to do it for real.
Would you?
I would have done it anyway if they said you got to put your career on hold, you got to
give two years of the program, you got to go through all the training, you might not be
able to get to fly but we're going to try to make it work out.
Would you do it?
I would, I'd do it.
Better be careful what you say.
Well, it wouldn't be the problem.
It's not a call.
The service of my country, I'd do it.
We have a lot of heroes now that seem to have, you know, gone the wrong way and I hate
to have kids follow the actions of previous famous people who are now in deep trouble.
I hopefully that the children of today look carefully at the type of people they want
to follow and to emulate and pick the right people.
Ashenots have in the past been a role model for children.
We did move forward as boldly and aggressively into the next arena which was really to take
and live in space.
I think we sort of surrendered after the Skylab program.
We got the enamored of transportation.
We need transportation but we should have always had that outpost in space going.
The managers at that time I self included lots of people in the United States down by
not being much more aggressive in articulating the use of space, the need for our country
to continue the process of exploration, the need to challenge our youth.
All of these things we just took for granted that someone is going to speak for us.
We should have spoken for ourselves.
You know, even to this day when you talk to the people at the Johnson Space Center, they
talk about some of the lessons that were learned on Apollo 13.
One of them is that when you send people in the space, it's just a very risky thing.
But if you take people who are bright and who know their business and let them set their
minds to any problem, they can do just about anything.
So what should we do to go back in the space?
Should we send people again and take that risk or should we use mechanized units to go
there?
We'd like to know how you feel.
You can drop us a line.
It's inside space, USA Network Sci-Fi Channel, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York,
1.002.0, or on the internet at inspaceatusanetworks.com.
I saw Apollo 13 last night.
It was a great movie.
And I cried.
And my wife sitting on my right, cried, and a producer sitting on my left, cried.
It's amazing how a movie where you know the ending can still evoke so much emotion.
Well, I'm Jeff Fox from the Space Center in Houston.
And I'll see you next time inside space.
13 stand by for staging.
Look at that.
That off is 12 plus 3, 4 over.
Coming up on 12 minutes 34.
And say go.
Cut down.
And that, you know, then, is how we knew that.